Dear fellow practitioners, for a
Buddhist disciple,
the days of the Buddha's birth, his renunciation, his enlightenment, and his
passing into
Nirvana are days that
Buddhist disciples often remember. Remembering these
four days
of the Buddha's life
makes one's mind more diligent.
The first benefit is that it makes
one's mind
more diligent. The days of the Buddha's enlightenment, when one
's mind is directed towards them, are extremely valuable
for those with the ideal of liberation and for
those who
want to benefit
sentient beings. The Buddha's enlightenment is a milestone, an affirmation that an ordinary person, if they practice the Buddha's teachings, can achieve the same results as the Buddha. It is an incredibly significant milestone. Dear fellow practitioners, when people live in this world and are faced with
uncertainty,
they don't know if their actions will yield
results or not. They
don't know where their actions will lead.
These are questions that leave
everyone feeling
uncertain.
I wonder, "I don't know
where this work is leading me, I don't know if
my work will reach its goal."
These are vague questions,
dear fellow practitioners. So, for a Buddhist
disciple, the day of the
Buddha's enlightenment resolves all these vague thoughts. With
the aspiration to cultivate
liberation, we become more enthusiastic and diligent. The
Buddha has already attained Buddhahood,
so we too will attain
Buddhahood. It's impossible not to attain Buddhahood
if we diligently practice the
Buddha's
teachings, accumulate merit, eliminate greed, hatred, and delusion, and have
the aspiration to attain Buddhahood.
Therefore, the anniversary of the
Buddha's enlightenment, all the commemorative ceremonies,
bring to the
Buddhist disciple this kind of diligence. And
we see that this practice
arises from circumstances at every moment, at every
stage. It's like climbing a step, dear fellow practitioners. Once you step
onto
this step, you'll have the opportunity
to step onto another step;
once you step onto that step, you'll have the opportunity to step onto the
next step.  Therefore, our mind,
our cultivation,
arises from the merit of our practice. This practice
today gives rise to
the conditions for tomorrow, giving rise to
the thoughts and understanding of the
next day. Therefore, these conditions that
encourage us cannot be without the
guidance of our fellow practitioners; it must be continuous.
If we lack this encouragement,
we will regress. We
can sit and think for a
while, for example, this year is the same. Just think for
a while, and the Buddha also attained Buddhahood.
So we too can cultivate to become Buddhas.
That's a thought that arises,
but before the many
worries and anxieties of
life, for lay people, and for those who have
renounced the world, living among fellow
practitioners, there is so much friction that makes
us very tired.
Because the starting
point of the
human mind is the ordinary mind—greedy, angry, envious, jealous—
therefore, to wear down that mind,
there must be conflict.  With the
six senses interacting with the six objects of perception, and
at that time, the objects of perception were all mind-to-
mind
interactions, it's easy to
forget our ideals,
our initial intentions, and we can't
generate the drive for diligence. At
that time, we
might feel discouraged and
chase after fame, wealth, and sensual pleasures.
But when we commemorate the Buddha's
enlightenment, we ask, "He achieved enlightenment, so
why can't we do the
same?" Each of these causes and conditions
arises differently in each person. The cause of diligence may arise differently in each individual.
Perhaps this year we don't generate
that intention, that urge,
but through diligent
practice—perhaps the precepts of a lay person,
perhaps the precepts of a
monastic—we still haven't achieved that
diligence. This year we may not have
that diligence, but we diligently practice the
precepts, the precepts that we might repeatedly violate
in our practice.  Maintaining precepts can be
difficult, or we can become lax,
just like Yen always said, sometimes we become lax about
our vows or
promises, we don't
fulfill them. Someone asks us for a little help, we
agree, and then we say, "Okay, I'll
help you tonight," but then we become lax again. If
we don't help, we just shrug and say, "I'll help tomorrow."
Then tomorrow, something happens and we forget about it. The day after tomorrow, we suddenly remember and
say, "Oh, I'm busy now."
That's laxity, dear fellow practitioners. Laxity
harms
our vows, and at that time,
we don't have anything to motivate
us. That laxity will continue, becoming a habit of breaking promises, and that habit of breaking
promises brings bad karma. And that bad karma creates more obstacles in fulfilling the next promise, and so we
don't uproot the old and create new ones.
Therefore, we can't be diligent
because we lack the necessary motivation.  The
encouragement: So, the day the Buddha attained
enlightenment is the
day we know that the Buddha attained
enlightenment. The Buddha meditated for 49 days until
he attained enlightenment. He showed us the
path to practice from the lowest to the
highest levels to achieve such a mindset, and to
make a firm resolution to
reflect on ourselves and strive forward.
Therefore, the commemorations of the
Buddha's enlightenment are extremely beneficial and
valuable for the liberation from
suffering of each and every being.
[music]